Welcome to Part 2 of my Blender Tutorial
on material shading. If you stumbled across
this video first, there is a Part 1 that covers
the absolute basics of shading in Blender. Part
2 is all about PBR materials. What they are,
where you get them and how to set them up.
With a bunch of extra tips
along the way and at the end.
I will be using Cycles for this tutorial. Most
of this will work in Eevee too so let’s go.
The PBR in “PBR materials” stands
for Physically Based Rendering.
It’s a workflow for using physical information
- images - to generate textures. You could make
your own PBR textures, but don’t because
there are tons of them already out there.
PBR textures are generally going to look much more
realistic than procedural textures which are made
by combining inputs like we did in part one.
When you obtain a PBR texture, you’re going to
get a series of images with specific labels. Each
image controls a different effect of the material.
So where do you get PBR materials? Lots of
places. I often use Poliigon which has both
free and paid materials. I’ve been happy
with them and will include an affiliate
link in the description. But, there are other
places to get free PBR materials for Blender.
Ambient CG is one place I would check out, but I’m
going to be using Poliigon. You can see they have
a pretty large library of really good materials.
When you choose a PBR material, also referred to
as a PBR texture, you have different resolution
options. For example here, we have from 1K all
the way up to 16K. Poliigon uses PNG images, but
some sites have JPEG’s which are smaller files but
can be lower quality. Which size you choose will
generally be based on how far away the material
is going to be in your scene. For things in the
background and honestly for most of your scene,
1K is probably fine. If it’s going to be close up
to the camera, consider going up a size or two.
Generally I find 3K to be fine for almost
anything. The larger the resolution,
the more it adds to memory draw and render time.
These are all the different maps the texture comes
with. I know I won’t use all of them, in fact
the two bump maps and two displacement maps are
just different size options you can use with this
material. But they don’t cost any extra, so I’ll
just download them all. They’ll all download into
a zip file which you can unzip on your computer.
It’s generally a good idea to store all of your
PBR textures in an organized file system. You can
change the names of the folders but don’t rename
the actual images themselves. They’re named the
way they are so that they can be recognized
by certain addons which we’ll see later.
Let’s go back into Blender and just start with
a new plane with a new material. I’ll name it
Poliigon, then let’s go into the shader editor.
We’ve got our default Principled BSDF shader.
I also have the file folder open with
the files I downloaded from Poliigon.com.
We can bring these files into the shader
editor a number of ways. We could press
Shift+A and add an image texture. This is
the node that plugs images into your node
tree. We can press “open” and navigate to
the folder where the material files are.
Or, if we have the folder open, we can simply
drag and drop an image into the shader editor.
Blender will automatically add
it into an image texture node.
A side note, you can navigate to and open these
image files even if they’re not extracted. But,
dragging and dropping the files won’t work unless
you extract the zip file. That’s good to know.
The first file we are going to start with is the
one labeled “color.” Actually, there are different
variations provided with this material. These are
just slightly different color options you have
with this material. I’ll pick one and I’ll drag
it into Blender. Since this is our base color,
we are going to drag the color output (the
yellow) into the base color input of the
Principled shader (which is also yellow).
Now, we’ve got our PBR base color laid out.
If you’ve made it this far,
please hit that like button - it would
mean the world to me. Thank you so much!
Next we’re going to work on our specular
input. Remember in part one I said there
are two workflows, specular and metallic.
Let me just go back to Poliigon for a
second. For certain metal materials,
you’ll see an option for workflow.
You can choose “metalness” or specular. These are
the two workflows I mentioned in part 1. There
are different reasons to use each one, it seems
metalness is more popular for metal materials.
Either one you want to use is fine, it’ll
just change one map that you have to plug in.
But for materials that are not metal, you won’t
see a metalness map and you’ll use a specular
map. But notice we don’t have an image labeled
specular here either. Sometimes specular maps
are called “reflection” maps. We do have
a map labeled “reflection” and that’s the
one we’re going to use right here. Drag the
reflection map into Blender and connect it to
the specular socket. Reflection equals specular.
Now, we have an issue here. We just plugged a
yellow socket into a grey socket. This isn’t the
end of the world, but when using an image texture
but NOT using it for color data, we need
to change this drop down box from “sRGB”
which means color, to “non-color.” This tells
Blender that even though this is a yellow output,
it’s not putting out color information with
this particular map. The end result will
usually be just a little off if you don’t
change this setting for non-color maps.
There’s one step we’ve missed here though.
And that is the mapping we covered in part 1.
We want to make sure these image maps are being
mapped properly to the object. We need to add
both a mapping node and a texture coordinate
node. Luckily, since we have the node wrangler
addon activated, there’s a shortcut. Select
one of the image textures and press “Control+T”
and it automatically adds both nodes.
And it told the texture coordinate node
to use the UV mapping which is what we want.
I will very quickly explain UV’s. When we take
a 2 dimensional texture and place it on a 3
dimensional object, we need to essentially
unwrap the object. Imagine printing a
label directly onto a cylindrical soda can.
UV unwrapping would be like cutting the soda
can open to lay it out flat so that a printer
can print on it. The U and the V represent the 2
axes of the 2 dimensional texture because the 3D
object already has the X, Y and Z axes labeled.
Unwrapping a plane is pretty much unnecessary
but it’s absolutely necessary for more complex
objects. To unwrap an object, we go into edit
mode, select what we want to unwrap. (You
CAN unwrap different parts separately).
Go to UV at the top and there are actually
different ways to unwrap an object. Usually,
I recommend “Smart UV Project.” Select
that. It has some options. Normally you
don’t have to change anything. Press OK.
We don’t actually need to do this here,
but if you wanted to edit your UV map, you can go
to the UV Editing workspace. This is our UV. It’s
a very, very simple UV, but a UV nonetheless.
There are plenty of Blender tutorials for UV
unwrapping, this was just the bare minimum to
understand. So let’s go back to our shader editor.
So this color image is mapped through the
mapping node and this specular map is not.
We want to connect this mapping node
to the specular map as well. Remember
an output can go to multiple inputs, but only
one output can go into a single input socket.
Back to our material files, the next thing we
want to map is our roughness. But again, there
is no map labeled roughness. It’s because other
softwares use “gloss” maps instead of roughness -
so you don’t always get a roughness map. But it’s
ok, I’ll show you how to work with this gloss map.
Let’s drag the gloss map into the shader editor.
We will again change “sRGB” to “non-color” because
this isn’t providing color information to the
Principled Shader. It’s providing black and white
data. And we’ll also connect it to the mapping
node. All of the image textures we use will
get plugged into the same mapping node because
we need them to all line up with one another.
Now when we connect this gloss map to the
roughness socket, we see a noticeable difference
in the material - that is if we’re in render
preview mode. A roughness map will make a material
look more realistic. But there’s a problem
because the gloss map is actually the inverse
of a roughness map. What’s black on a gloss map is
white on the roughness map and vice versa. So the
parts that are supposed to be rough are not rough
and the parts that are not supposed to be rough
are rough. To fix this there’s a handy node we can
add between the gloss map and the roughness input
that flips this all around. It’s called an invert
node. Shift+A and search for “invert” Drop this
right between the two nodes. This node takes data
in from the left - like all nodes do. It flips,
or inverts, the black and white values. Then
it spits out the new information on the right.
There’s another map in this pack that will add
a lot of realism. And that’s the normal map.
Normal maps, as mentioned in part 1, fake depth
by manipulating how light hits the material.
They are not very draining on your
computer but add enough realism to
be used as long as they’re not
right up in front of the camera.
The normal map is this purple map. It’s
a specific type of color mapping that I
don’t fully understand but that Blender does. So
let’s drop the normal map into the shader editor.
We again need to connect this to our mapping node
and we again need to change it to non-color data.
This normal map needs to be plugged into the
normal input of the principled shader. But look,
we have a different problem here. We have a
yellow going into a purple and that’s a no-no.
So what we drop between these nodes is a normal
map node. Shift+A and search for normal map. This
node takes yellow socket color information and
turns it into a purple output specifically for
normal maps. This is the strength of the normal
map. Let’s click on it and change it to ten to
really emphasize what this normal map is doing.
Boom. Did you see that? How much realism the
normal map added when we turned the strength
up. This is one area where these materials
work a lot better in Cycles than they do in
Eevee. If we turned this strength up in Eevee,
it really won’t do anything. Cycles is just
much more capable of handling details like this.
A quick break because Youtube pays me practically
nothing for these videos. Topaz Studio is one of
my favorite tools to use after I render in
Bleder. It’s a collection of very powerful
filters. I use it on every single render. Here’s
an example of a render straight out of Blender
and here’s what it looked like after using
Topaz Studio. I am not sponsored but I made an
entire video on Topaz Studio and have an
affiliate link in the description. There
are endless adjustments you can make
to improve your render and the best
part - it’s a one time purchase
with no ongoing subscription.
Please support my channel by checking it out with
the affiliate link in the description. Thank you!
Displacement maps in Blender give you another
level of realism. I’m going to turn down the
normal value to demonstrate this. We can drag
the displacement map into the scene, change it
to non-color data because it’s not going into
a color socket. We also want to map this to our
UV by connecting it to the mapping node. Now, this
map is going to run into the displacement channel,
not the surface channel like the others.
If we drag it directly into the displacement
channel, it’s not going to work because
we have a yellow going into a purple.
Similar to the normal map, we need a specific
converter to change the information from this
greyscale image into the information Blender needs
to make this displacement work. This time we are
going to use a displacement node and drop it
between the displacement map and the final output
shader. But, this automatically plugs the input
into the normal socket. We actually want this
image, with black and white color information,
to affect the height of the displacement - not
the normal because it isn’t a normal map.
To actually see the changes for this,
we need to be in render preview mode.
They won’t show up in material preview.
When we plug the displacement into the socket,
a couple things happen. We do see more detail
in the “bump” of the material. Also, you might
have noticed the entire object kind of shifted.
The shifting is because of this midlevel
setting. It offsets the entire geometry and
most of the time, I’ve found I don’t want
it to do that so I change this to zero.
Ok, this added a little bit of bump but what’s the
big deal? Well, to really show you the power of
displacement, I’m going to duplicate this plane.
Let’s go to the material panel and scroll down
until we see the settings tab. Open settings and
under surface, we find a setting for displacement.
This setting tells Blender how to use
this displacement map either as a true
displacement map or something called a bump
map - which is similar to a normal map as far
as the end result. There’s also an option to
use both bump and displacement which is going
to give you the most realistic effect probably.
What it defaults to is the bump map, which is what
we see here, a little more detail without any more
geometry needed. Let’s change to displacement.
Nothing really happens. This is because true
displacement uses the geometry of the mesh
and this plane only has one face on it.
Let’s select this plane, tab into edit
mode and subdivide the plane a few times.
Now when we tab into object mode we see
the displacement has done something but this is
not right. On the displacement node, this scale
setting affects how strong the displacement is
and the default of one is just way too high.
Changing it to .1 is probably more appropriate.
But it’s still not great because we only have so
much geometry here. Adding a subdvision surface
modifier will help and we should change it from
catmull to simple because we don’t need
the smoothing that the catmull provides,
just the geometry. This is alright. There
are a couple ways to make it better. We could
use more subdivisions or a higher resolution
displacement map. But realize that now we are
significantly impacting the performance. We’ve
added a ton of geometry to this plane already.
The absolute best way to do this is actually
to use adaptive subdivision. And I fear this
section of the tutorial is already dragging
on way too long. But, adaptive subdivision is
intelligent subdivision that subdivides the
mesh more the closer it is to the camera
and it’s perfect for this. To use it, you
have to be in cycles, you have to turn on
“experimental” in the render settings and
then on your subdivision surface, you’ll
have an option for adaptive subdivision. Check
that and you’re going to have this displacement
be about as realistic as you can get it.
For a lot of things, normal maps and bump
maps are going to be just fine but this
was an overview of displacement for you.
Hey, remember to hit that like button
if you’re still here. Thank you so much!
Ok, so we’ve just created a basic PBR texture.
Let’s say this texture was either too big or too
small for what we wanted. We can go back to our
mapping node and adjust the scale. We generally
want to adjust the scale uniformly across all
axes. It’d be annoying to have to adjust all three
of these values so we can do one of two things.
Under scale, either click the top value and drag
down. This will allow you to type in a number on
the top and have it applied to all three numbers.
Or what I prefer to do is Shift+A and add a
value node. Plug it into the scale of the input.
And now you can slide the value of this up and
down or type in a value. The larger the scale,
the smaller the texture gets and it will
eventually start to repeat. Smaller scale
will make the texture bigger on the object.
But, understand that we may have this texture
applied to multiple objects and making it bigger
or smaller right here will change the settings
on every object that is using this material.
So an alternative, and probably the way you
should do it, is to go into the UV editor and
adjust the scale of the object’s UV instead.
This on the left is our UV for what
we have selected. In this case,
it’s the entire object’s mesh. We can press
“A” to make sure everything is selected.
Then press “S” to scale the UV instead of the
actual material. This will only affect the scale
of the material on this object and actually only
on the portion of the object you have selected.
Pressing G will allow you to move it around
if you want to line it up how you want.
And R will let you rotate the UV - again
not affecting the actual material itself.
That was a ton of work just to set up
one PBR. And it was a lot to remember.
Well it’s important that you got a basic
understanding of PBR material setups,
but you don’t need to do this every single time
you set up a new material in Blender. Let’s remove
this material and start from scratch with a new
Principled shader. This is only going to work
with node wrangler activated in the preferences,
which we discussed in part 1 but as a reminder,
make sure you go into your preferences - addons
and check on the box next to “node wrangler.”
Select the Principled BSDF shader by clicking
on it. Press “Control Shift T” and this file
navigator opens. Navigate to the folder where
your PBR texture files are. Select the maps
that you want to add. I’ll choose color,
gloss, reflection, normal and displacement.
Press Principled Texture Setup.
Amazing. Blender just added all these
maps into the shader editor and connected them
exactly as I already showed you how to before.
It even organized the textures into
frames and added a reroute node.
It inverted the gloss and added the normal map.
It changed the appropriate image textures to
non-color for us. Super easy. And that’s
really how you add PBR materials in Blender.
And as I promised, here are a few extra tips as
a reward for making it this far in the video.
Once you have your PBR texture set up, there
are a few common but optional things you can do.
For some of these black and white
nodes like roughness and specular,
you can feed them through a colorramp node. This
will give you some control over how reflective the
material is by either sliding the control points
or darkening the white values. You could put them
through separate colorramp nodes or through a
single node to control both of them together.
When you have color information traveling
from one node to another, there are a few
nodes that you can actually use to adjust the
colors. Let’s first start with a hue/saturation
node and plug it in here. Changing the hue
could give a stylized look to the material.
The saturation setting can add saturation to
the base color or lower it to have a more black
and white look. And with the value slider, you
can lower the value to make the material darker
or increase it to make it lighter.
With any node selected, you can press
“M” on your keyboard to mute the node. This
removes all of that node’s calculations without
having to remove the node itself. It’s a good way
to quickly see if you prefer the material with or
without the changes made by this node.
Another node you can add here is an RGB
curves node. You may or may not be familiar
with using curves for color correction,
but in short there’s a red, green and blue
channel as well as a combined channel that
controls all of them at once. There’s
an entire science behind using curves to
adjust colors if you wanted to look into that.
These reroute nodes are handy when you have one
output going to multiple inputs. You can add one
by pressing Shift+A and searching for “reroute.”
Or if your nodes are already connected
and you have node wrangler turned on,
you can hold down shift, click and drag across
the multiple connections and Blender will add
a reroute node for you. If you want to move the
reroute node, you need to select it and press G
to move it round like you would with an object.
If you want these nodes to take up less space,
you can click this expand arrow at the top left
of a node, to collapse it down to just this.
It removes clutter but you can quickly
expand it back out when you need it.
When you have a big node like the Principled
BSDF, but you’re not using all of the sockets,
you can select the node and go to Node - Toggle
Hidden Node Sockets (or you can press Control+H)
and it hides the sockets you’re not using.
These connections, that are also called
“noodles” by the way in Blender. You
can control how straight or curvy
they are. I think they might actually be
straight by default but I don’t remember.
Go to edit - preferences - themes - then find node
editor and expand this part. Go all the way down
to the bottom and there’s a setting called “noodle
curving.” I have it set to four. Changing it to
zero will make the noodles completely straight.
Increasing it will change the curviness of the
noodle, you can adjust to your own liking.
My name is Brandon, don’t forget to hit that
like button and subscribe if you haven’t
already. Thank you so much for watching!